20	 Services Magazine	 September 2003
        ontemporary life is fraught with many frustrations.  Rapid
        change in all aspects of life - personal, social and business 
life - are evident every day . Information, some useful, some not, 
threatens to consume us.  The trick is to harness information that 
can be useful and to apply it in a meaningful and worthwhile 
way.
Information relating to business is in the forefront. Literally , 
today's concept becomes tomorrow's standar d. It happens in the 
blink of an eye. Miss the boat and you miss opportunity .
Staying current, deciding the proper application of new 
information and that which is important for you in no easy task. 
Complacency is the enemy . How does one stay current? How can 
one person know it all? Even a fixed staf f, busy with the day-to-
day task of operating a business, can't do it all. Sometimes none 
of us can see the for est for the trees.
Those of you engaged in the building service industry are not 
immune to the phenomenon of supersonic change. Think of the 
evolution of the industry since 1980. Many of those that have not 
dealt with the times are long since gone. Remember them?
How can we stay current? Enter the consultant... traditionally the 
expert from 50 miles away that has all the answers. Not really . 
however, the genuine consultant can add to the ener gy of a 
company.
In today's world of cost conscious busy executives, use of a 
consultant or consulting group may work for you. Consultants 
have been around for a long tie. You've used their services in 
legal and accounting matters. There are other areas of expertise 
for which a business may find a consultant useful and cost 
effective. To name a few:
v Strategic Planning
v Human Resources
v Insurance/Safety
v Training
v Marketing
v Merger and acquisition advisory/intermediary services
v Computer and Software application
v And More
So, who are consultants and how come they know so much? 
Simply stated, consultants are people that have, by virtue of their 
experience and specific knowledge, or ganized that expertise and 
specific knowledge in a form that can be useful to others. When 
applied to a specific case or situation, problems can be solved or, 
averted. More than that, future needs and opportunities can be 
anticipated and knowledge applied so that little problems don't 
become big ones. You may also have the chance to seize an 
opportunity.
A consultant is simply added temporary staf f with specific 
information that, if employed properly , can help maintain 
business vitality. However, be advised that if you're smart 
enough to use a consultant, you need to be smart enough to put 
to use what you've learned through the consultant. The 
consultant provides analysis, insight and direction. Management 
provides implementation.
As in any profession, most consultants are ef fective. A few are 
not. If you consider using a consultant, there are certain 
guidelines that can assure the experience will be positive and
CC
BY GARY PENROD, CBSE
Need Help?
Call a
Consultant
Need Help?
Call a
Consultant

cost effective. These guidelines include:
v Have a clear idea of the project for which you retain a consultant.
v Convey the essence of your concept of the project to the consultant.
v Articulate goals, including time parameters.
v Have a clear and precise understanding about cost and terms.
v Establish certain criteria.
v Determine payment schedules and amount.
v Create an engagement agreement that is all-inclusive, after having
	 determined the essence of the project.
v Make no assumptions about the project's progress. manage the project.
Even projects with good intentions and clear goals can drag on 
with no end in sight. The consultant hired on an ad-hoc basis 
can, if allowed, become a fixture. Like any project or venture, 
the project for which the consultant was hired must be managed, 
being careful to not let one project dif fuse into many. The result 
may be to simply end up with another staf f member in the 
management mix.
What about cost? As stated earlier , there must be a clear 
understanding about cost, the project stage at which a payment is 
due and payment terms. Cost will vary according to time and 
material spent (hourly , daily, etc.) or it can be on a lump sum, per 
project basis. In other cases, as in the case of acquisition and/or 
merger advisory/intermediary services, a fee is paid only if and 
when the project is successfully completed. Whatever the 
agreement, it should be clearly understood by each party and be 
in written form.
Select the consultant that is right for you. Have a good feeling 
about the person or people with whom the project is being 
entrusted. Be comfortable with the choice, but be vigilant about 
monitoring progress. Be prepared and able to terminate the 
project if necessary . The success or failure of a project is a 
shared responsibility between the consultant and those who 
managed the project.
The basis of a consultant's value and the determining factor in 
his or her selection is knowledge, expertise and participation in 
past successful projects... in a word, his or her credentials. 
Follow instincts to a point, but check credentials. You don't want 
to repeat someone else's mistake.
In contemporary business life, outsourcing certain specific tasks 
can be a very ef fective use of time and money if employed with 
forethought. In many cases, firms simply don't have the in-house 
resources to complete projects that will permit them to thrive and 
progress. Approach the retention of a consultant in the manner in 
which you would make any significant purchase or would hire a 
permanent staff member.
Gary Penrod, CBSE, founded and operated a successful building service 
firm. He has been a BSCAI member for 13 years, wher e he has served as a 
board member, which included a term as Pr esident. He formed Gary Penr od 
and Associates, Inc., a consulting service with specialty in pr oviding 
advisory/intermediary services to the mer ger/acquisition sector of the 
building service industry .
September 2003	 Services Magazine	 21
FOLLOW INSTINCTS TO A POINT
BUT CHECK CREDENTIALS.
YOU DON'T WANT TO REPEAT
SOMEONE ELSE'S MISTAKE