 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Acquisition Process 
 
 
The following is  the THIRD of a Series of three articles about the acquisition market  sector  within the  
building services  industry.  In the first article , I addressed issues associated with buying  a company.  The 
second article dealt with selling  one’s company. In each case, there was an effort to deal with the softer 
issues that both a buyer and seller will encounter. By softer, I mean the human side of acquisition. Certainly 
the technical side is important  too, so in this article I will review some of  the  more  technical  parts  of  the  
process, but  with  some of  the  softer  issues associated with  those  necessary technical aspects.–G.P. 
 
There is a process that  has developed  during  over  the  years that  helps with  the  orderly  acquisition  of  one entity  by another. The process 
can be somewhat flexible, each transaction having its own uniqueness. 
 
The Confidentiality Agreement (CA), or  Non- Disclosure Agreement (NDA) 
 
This is the document, agreed upon by each party, protecting the confidentiality that  a seller is considering the sale of the company and that the 
prospective buyer is considering its purchase. The CA, or NDA, provides the mutual benefit of secrecy about the potential transaction. While 
there are legal ramifications if violated, it is rare for violation among professionals. It should never be entered into lightly and should always 
be entered into in good faith. 
 
The Confidential Information Memorandum (CIM) 
 
This is nothing more than a package of information that  describes all aspects of the company to be sold. It does not have to be so spectacular 
that it dazzles the reader,  but  it  should  contain  enough  information   and  be  well  organized  so that  the  prospective  buyer,  when  finished  
perusing,  will  have  enough  factual information  about  the company to have some idea about  whether  or not it will be worth  considering 
its acquisition.  The seller, or the seller’s representative, prepares the CIM. For it to be effective, the CIM should be well organized, accurate 
and complete. 
 
The CIM should provide enough information, b u t not necessarily all information.  For example, the CIM does not usually include customer 
identification.  Neither does it include the names of key management employees . In the real world, of course, some of this information is  
known by virtue of the prospective buyer knowing this information through  participation in the market place. 
 
The CIM’s purpose is to inform those who may have interest in the company with an in-focus snapshot of the business. It is essential for a 
serious seller and a serious buyer  to have this point  of reference  for  on-going  discussions that  may lead to  a continuation  of the  
acquisition  process. As the acquisition process  continues, sometimes for months, the CIM should be updated monthly to include a current 
trailing 12-month (TTM) financial report, plus  any other noteworthy changes in the company and provided to all that have the CIM. 
 
The Letter of Intent (LOI) 
 
This formal document, sometimes referred to as a Memorandum of Intent, is the prospective buyer’s expression of intent to buy the 
company, showing the price, price components,  the transaction  structure,  anticipated  closing date and other  major  aspects of the proposed 
transaction.  Generally, the LOI is not binding, however, there  may be certain aspects, such as confidentiality a n d the no shop provisions that 
are  binding.  Usually, each has a time  limitation; the no-shop provision  lasting  only  as long  as the  time  limitation  shown  in  the  LOI.  The 
confidentiality   aspect may have a longer life  as per the original  ag reed  upon confidentiality agreement . While nonbinding, except for the 
exceptions noted, the LOI should always be entered into in good faith. The LOI is not the final closing document and can be amended by 
mutual agreement ; however, if amended, it is usually because there have developed significant changes  in the company’s profile that warrant 
the change. 
 
The LOI has a finite life which is usually 75 to 90 days after the terms have been agreed to by all parties. It can be extended by mutual 
agreement as necessary. The LOI is important in that it forms the foundation for the closing documents that are to come. 
 
Due Diligence 
 
Due diligence is the process by which the prospective buyer proves what has been presented as being factual information  about the 
company, including (1)  a review of at least three years of financial reports; (2) detailed analysis of all add backs to profit as presented in the 
CIM; (3) AR aging report;  (4) determination  of the working  capital needs; (5) a complete customer analysis, including longevity,  time to end 
of current  contract,  customer satisfaction;  (6) size relative to the entire customer base and its individual performance;  (7) inspection of office 
and warehouse facilities; (8) inventory  of equipment and material; (9) the inspection of major  customer  facilities,  sometime  including  the  
introduction  to  the  customer,  (10)  interviews  with  key company  managers,  and; (11)  any other  matter deemed important  to the 
 
 
prospective buyer. 
 
The time needed and the depth of information required  will vary from buyer to buyer. It is important to  each party that the process be 
completed in an orderly and complete manner. The process has changed during recent years in that much of it can be completed 
electronically, with minimal interruption to  the on-going business activity of  the  company  being  inspected .  However,  sometimes  there  will  
be  a need  for  onsite  due  diligence,  often  conducted  by  an  outsourced accounting group hired by the prospective buyer. 
 
It is during the due diligence process that, while confidentiality has  been maintained up to this point, certain people within the company 
should now be apprised that the company is going to be sold. To not do so could be detrimental to  those persons’ relationship with the seller 
and could even have a negative impact on the transaction. Each seller will have to determine how to handle this and which, among the 
employees, should to be informed. 
 
It is during the due diligence process that there is the concurrent effort  by the prospective buyer to develop all of the closing documents, 
including the complete sale agreement, any promissory note, employee employment agreements and noncompete and/or nonsolicitation 
agreements. 
In  some  cases the  seller,  upon  revealing  certain  customer  and  key  employee  information,   may  require  a  nonsolicitation   agreement  
from  the  buyer.  A nonsolicitation agreement  means that the buyer is barred from soliciting those customers and recruiting those employees 
for a period of time. Usually, it will not prevent the buyer from bidding on work offered by those customers if requested by the customer. It 
can be a very sensitive area, so a precise understanding by both parties is necessary. 
 
It is customary for the prospective buyer to bear all costs for the due diligence process. 
 
 
The Closing Documents 
 
The closing documents are developed by the prospective buyer and will usually include the following: 
 
The Agreement of Sale, which will reflect the original LOI, except that it will include significantly more detail. It will also include schedules, 
lists, contracts, leases and other documents pertinent to the complete transaction.  Frequently, this and the other documents will circulate 
among the buyer, seller and their respective representatives several times before the document is finally approved by each group. 
 
The Promissory Note is what the name implies. It represents the amount and terms of what the buyer and seller have agreed upon as to the 
amount, rate of interest and payment schedule that the buyer will pay to the seller. The Noncompete Agreement is the agreement is the 
agreement barring the seller, having sold the company will not, for a period of time, engage  in that same type of business within a specified 
geographic area. Usually, the noncompete is reserved for shareholders of the company being sold, usually for a term of three to five years. 
 
The Nonsolicitation Agreement is frequently reserved  for key employees of the company being sold and may be part of their employment 
agreement. It provides that the person will not solicit customers or employees of the company being sold for a period of time. A non-
solicitation agreement  usually does not prevent a person from being engaged in or being employed by a company in the same industry or 
market area so long as the terms of the non-solicitation agreement  are honored. 
 
Employment Agreements are often included among the closing documents for shareholders and other key personnel that will be transferring 
to  the new entity. Other agreements may be included in the closing documents, depending on the negotiations that transpired between the 
parties. 
 
The Advisors 
 
It is not likely for a company owner to possess all of the information and  skill necessary to complete the acquisition transaction from start 
to finish, whether a buyer or a seller. Various advisor disciplines are required that include financial, legal, accounting and, for some, the M&A 
specialist. 
 
A Legal Advisor provides a necessary function.  It is that discipline that provides the seller or the buyer with legal advice about all of the closing 
documents. A CPA Advisor provides historical data, explaining the financial records and notes to the financial reports for the historical and 
current periods. 
 
An M&A Intermediary  Specialist is frequently  called upon  to  assist either  the  buyer  or  the  seller through  the  complexities  of  the  entire  
sale process, from beginning to end. They work through and coordinate with their client’s other advisors. They—at any given time—have the 
entire scope of the transaction in view. 
 
It is customary that the buyer and the seller each bear their own costs for professional fees and other closing costs. 
 
The acquisition process may or may not include each of the steps outlined here, but there really should be an organized path for the process. 
Of course, there will be a great deal of discussion leading up to and during each step of the process. The dialogue is the matrix for the steps 
coming together, resulting  in a sound transaction that is good for the buyer and the seller. The ongoing dialogue is important also in that it 
 
 
forms the basis of a relationship between the buyer and the seller. If the relationship is based on mutual respect and even, friendship, the 
transition to a successful transaction will have far fewer obstructions. 
 
Acquisition is a business effort that is here to stay. It can provide positive results for the buyer and the seller if the entire process is entered 
into wisely, if the process is executed professionally and competently and if all parties act, using sound business judgment and  act in good 
faith with one another.  Transactions within the building services industry have often proven to be wise endeavors for buyers and sellers. The 
acquisition process within the building services industry has improved and matured as the industry has matured and improved; now standing 
among other viable industries within the world of commerce. 
 
This is the last of a series of three articles dealing with the M&A sector of the building services industry.  These articles have highlighted what is 
important for  the buyer and the seller to know and what they need to learn if they choose to engage in the M&A sector. Each M&A 
undertaking is unique simply because each company situation is unique. One size does not fit all. 
Gary Penrod is CEO and managing associ ate of Gary Penrod and Assoc iates, Inc. (GPA), an industry specific M&A in termediary 
firm. Penrod is a frequent speaker and au thor of  articles about the bu ilding services industry. A former building services  
contractor, he served for many years as  a BSCAI board member, including one  year as  its president. V isit 
www.garypenrodandassociates.com. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 