1 | Page  
 
March 29, 2009 
J
Th f the 
Buil d dustry: 
anuary  2011 
e M&A Sector o
ing Services In
Current Status 
OPINION –  Gary A. Penrod 
  Gary Penrod and Associates, Inc. 
  843 681 6588 x11 
  Penrod3111@aol.com 
  www.garypenrodandassociates.com  
 
  While the economic climate has got ten better, or so we hear, we are not yet out of the woods, so it 
is not yet time to relax your guard.  Expect more of  the same for the immediate future. Whether or not 
the November 2010 election will influence the future is not known, but time will tell. For now, the best 
advice that can be offered is to; (1) continue to  do what worked for you when hit by the Great 
Recession of 2008, (2) conserve cash, (3) operate efficiently,(4) gr ow wisely and appropriately and 
(5) be prepared for the next round, if it happens. 
 
  The M&A sector of the building services indus try has weathered the Great Recession of 2008 
fairly well, although there were fe wer transactions completed in 2009 than in previous years. What 
about 2011 ? What can be expected?  We don’t know  for certain and, based on the many theories 
expressed in the media, no one else does eith er. CFO Magazine (December 2010) quoted George 
Bernard Shaw as saying, “ If all of the economis ts were laid end-to-end, they would not reach a 
conclusion.” In some respects, Shaw may have a point, but certainly we can still forecast, using what 
we know for certain and staying alert to anticipate what is ahead. We at GPA expect the rate of 
transactions to continue at a near  pre 2008 pace. We have experienced a rush in 2010, partly due to 
the uncertainty about whether or not the current tax rate structure will end or be extended. It has now 
been concluded that the current tax rate will be extended through 2012.  Two years is not a long time, 
so we expect the rush to continue. Key, of course, is the current capital gain rate of 15% which, after 
2012, could rise to 28%, or higher. Therefore, c onsidering everything and unless there is a complete 
economic meltdown, we expect a brisk rate of transactions for the next two years. 
 
 
 
2 | Page  
 
 
  According to the William Blair & Company M& A Market Analysis, November, 2010: “Heading 
into the final months of 2010, M&A activity remain s solidly up for the year and is poised to report its 
first increase in three years. We exp ect the fourth quarter to finish strong, as companies continue to 
take advantage of higher equity prices, loosen ing credit markets and tax considerations. Private 
equity activity, particularly in the United States, has picked up significantly over the past several 
months as the debt markets continue to thaw and firms look to invest the roughly $400 billion to $500 
billion of committed capital available.  In addition, the higher equity valuations have helped push the 
price multiples up significantly over the past 12 mont hs. We believe that the overall environment for 
transaction activity remains favorable and all si gns point to a strong finish for 2010 and a positive 
start to 2011.” 
 
  How does this relate to the M&A sector of the building services industry ?  We at GPA believe 
that the William Blair & Company conclusion supports what we too have concluded, that is, there are 
sufficient funds available for transactions in wh ich the buyer is qualified and the seller has a well 
managed, profitable company that is engaged in providing services in viable market sectors and 
market areas. 
 
  I am pleased to let you know that GPA’s  Stay Tuned letters have been generating interest among 
those that read them, calling or emailing me with a variety of questions and comments, some of which 
are in agreement with what Stay Tuned has put forth, others that have concluded something different.  
I encourage this dialog to continue ; it provides all of us the opportun ity to learn. We do not pretend 
to be absolute experts, rather, we are observers of  M&A activity in the building services industry and 
how general economic conditions affects that M&A ac tivity.  As such, it has certainly been reinforced 
to us recently that the building services industry is  recession resistant.  As such, in general, this 
means that valuation for companies engaged in the industry do hold the valuation line. Most 
companies engaged in the industry are considered to be small business. Our estimate is that there are 
about  forty thousand building service contractors in the United States, about 70% of which have 
sales under $1.5 million, so it is a highly fragmented i ndustry. Whether small or large, these firms, if 
well managed, provide a good living for its shareholder(s) and do have value for prospective buyers. 
 
  As mentioned, we do receive a variety of questions from Stay Tuned readers. Many of the 
questions ask about specific buyers and buyers in gen eral. While we refrain from speculation about 
specific buyers, we do point out that there are m any qualified buyers that have genuine interest in 
acquiring companies of all sizes and in all market a reas. We also point out that the recent economic 
situation has piqued the interest of some investor buyers that like industries that provide monthly  
3 | Page  
 
 
 recurring revenue and are also recession resistant. T hat, of course, describes the building services 
industry. Investor buyers tend to gravitate to companies with adjusted ( for add-backs to profit and/or 
expense) ebitda of $1.5 million, or more. There ar e, however, exceptions to this, especially if the 
investor group already has building services companies in its portfolio. 
 
  Prospective sellers that contact GPA exp ress concern about confidentiality. No doubt, 
confidentiality is an important element in any acqui sition effort. It must be appreciated and adhered 
to by both the buyer and the seller and their key employees and advisors that have any knowledge 
about the prospective transaction. A agreement of confidentiality must be executed by both parties 
and it should  be executed in good faith. It means that  both parties, each being privy to confidential 
information about the other and that a transaction is being considered, agree to not disclose this 
information to anyone for any reason that does not have a need to know about the information. The 
agreement of confidentiality (CA) (sometimes  referred to as a non-disclosure agreement (NDA) 
should be entered in to in good-faith, however, it should not be confused with its being a non-compete 
or non-solicitation agreement. At some point during the acquisition process, usually during the due 
diligence phase after specific contract and customer in formation has been revealed, the prospective 
buyer may be asked to execute a non-solicitation agreem ent for the seller’s acc ounts. In most cases, 
this simply means that the prospective buyer will  not actively solicit the seller’s accounts during the 
process or after the process for a specified period of  time if the transaction does not close. The buyer, 
however, if requested by the customer to provide  servi ces is usually free to do so, so long as the 
customer was not solicited by the buyer. It should be pointed out that most transactions that get to the 
due diligence phase, do close. 
 
  We are also frequently asked about the letter of intent (LOI), its meaning and its importance.  The 
LOI is the means used by a prospective buyer to express his intent to acquire the seller’s company, 
specifying the price, price components and general term s. If accepted by the seller, the LOI’s no shop 
provision means that , for the life of the LOI (us ually 60 to 90 days) the seller will not actively seek 
other buyers. While some provisions of the LOI a re binding, it is generally non-binding, however, it 
should be entered in to in good-faith by both par ties. Either party can usually, for any reason, 
terminate the LOI.  It does not happen often, but it does happen. 
 
  By far, most questions and/or comments that  we receive concern valuation. Sometimes, the 
question is basic, “what is the current multiple ?(referring to the multiple of ad justed ebitda to arrive 
at price)  Since each valuation is unique to a given set of circumstances, there can be no definitive 
answer to that question. There are rules of thumb, of course, but it can be misleading to apply any  
 
 rule of thumb to a specific situation since each company is unique in its performance, market areas, 
market sectors, retention rate and other important  c haracteristics. Market valuation is not an exact 
science, but, given specific information about a company, the market valuation process  can produce 
a valuation that is very close to that which interest ed prospective buyers will agree.   Ultimately, of 
course, the market valuation is determined by what the buyer and seller agree upon. 
 
  Good-faith is essential in any serious M&A ne gotiation. That does not necessarily mean that 
there will be total agreement on all points, but it does mean that each participant must act in a 
confidential and professional manner in all aspects of the acquisition process. Compromise too, is 
essential. I have never seen a transaction close without some compromise on each party’s part. 
 
  At GPA, we establish all of the necessary ground rules among the parties, providing the 
confidentiality agreement, non-solicitation agreement and  the package of inform ation needed for the 
process to begin.  We are not law yers, so whether a prospective buyer or seller, each party will need 
to retain counsel. 
 
  We like what we do and do learn from each transaction in which we are involved.  So, after 18 
years of providing M&A intermediary services to  both buyers and sellers in the building services 
industry, we have accumulated a body of informatio n that serves each of our clients well. We intend 
to continue serving our clients, adding to our business acumen, transaction by transaction. 
 
  In many cases, GPA associates work collabora tively on any given project.  Recently, Michelle 
Sullivan Bettez was joined GPA as an administrative associate.  She will work closely with other 
associates for the sole purpose of pr oviding the best service possible for GPA's clients.  All of us at 
GPA welcome her and look forward to her contribution to our effort.  
 
  We remain cautiously optimistic about the economy and very optimistic about the future of the 
building services industry.   As always, I will app reciate and look forward to your questions and 
comments about this particular Stay Tuned or about activity within the M&A sector of the building 
services industry that you care to discuss. 
  
    STAY TUNED!  
4 | Page  
 
