Spring 2012 
1 | P a g e  
 
Stay Tuned 
The M&A Sector of the 
Building Services Industry: 
 
Spring 2012 
 
Opinion:  Gary A Penrod 
Gary Penrod and Associates, Inc. 
843.681.6588 x 11 
Gary@garypenrod.com 
 
 
STAY TUNED –  A Periodic Update Of The Building Services Industry’s M&A Sector 
 
The current M&A climate for activity is very much like it has been since the last half of 2011: active, 
but not necessarily on fire. The transactions that are being completed seem to be worki ng out well for 
both the buyer and seller. The usual price components of cash, promissory note and earn out, seem to be 
in line with past transactions of 65% cash and the balance being in either earn out and/or subordinated 
promissory note. Of course, as usual, each transaction is unique in price rationale and price components. 
 
 
BUYER PREFERENCE 
 
Prospective buyers, whether investor or strategic, prefer certain market areas over others, sometimes 
being dictated by whether or not there is strong union activity. This is not always the case, but it can be a 
factor. The favored market areas now appear to be the mid -Atlantic, mid -west, south -east and south -
central. Buyers also have preference about the market sectors in which a company is engaged. It is no 
secret that companies that are engaged in the education, high tech, medical and industrial sectors seem to 
be favored. Market penetration and better customer retention are among the reasons cited for this 
preference. That, of course, does not mean that the ofte n maligned commercial, multi -tenant office 
sector does not have a place on the ladder of preferences among some buyers, because it does. 
 
 
THE ECONOMY 
 
I guess that many are becoming used to the current economy and its influence on business. While there 
is certainly uncertainty, many have adapted to operating well within that environment. This is especially 
true for the building services industry that has shown remarkable ability to adapt through being creative, 
innovative and having dedicated and competent management. 
 
Spring 2012 
2 | P a g e  
 
Qualified prospective buyers are ready to go! We, as I am sure others do too, receive many inquiries 
from buyers seeking good companies to acquire. We have learned that not all buyers are equal, so we 
have to do our homework to find the ones that are serious, qualified and that have realistic and 
reasonable expectations. Many of the prospective buyers now are investor buyers; some are strategic 
buyers. I think that the disparity between investor buyers and strategic buyers is probably due to 
strategic buyers still being very cautious and are guarding their cash. The strategic buyers that are active 
now are usually seeking smaller companies that are $10 M, or less in revenue. Investor buyers are 
usually seeking companies with at least $1.5 M or greater in adjusted ebitda. 
 
There appears to be some seller reluctance at the moment. Maybe this is due to some poor performance 
and their anticipation of what the price and structure for their company will be. If that is the reason, they 
should not make any assumptions about price a nd structure until it has been thoroughly investigated by 
persons qualified to assist in determining market valuation. Hearsay is not a basis to provide a true 
market valuation for a company! One thing is for certain: if selling a company anytime in the near future 
is an option, 2012 may be the optimal time to do it because of the tax law changes coming in 2013, 
regardless of which political party wins Congress and/or the White House. More will be discussed about 
this later. 
 
 
VALUATIONS / TRANSACTION STRUCTURES 
 
Overall, market valuations have held the line; however, buyers are being more critical in their analysis, 
wanting to bet on “sure things.” While true that each transaction is unique, it has become evident that in 
keeping with the “sure thing” approa ch, buyers seem to be structuring their offers with less cash and 
more risk sharing with the seller, whether in earn out form, seller retained equity, or seller financing. As 
usual, the ultimate success of a transaction requires the buyer and the seller to share in that common goal 
by working together. 
 
 
2012:   
THE YEAR TO SELL IF SELLING IF PLANNED DURING THE NEXT SEVERAL YEARS 
 
As the cliché goes; “ it is not the price, it is how much of the price that one keeps.”  Many know that the 
long-term capital gain rate is due to increase from 15% to  20%, beginning January 1, 2013,  if Congress 
does not act.  S ome may not realize that there could (subject to the Supreme Court’s ruling about 
whether or not the healthcare legislation of 2010 is constitutional) be an a dditional 3.8% Medicare Tax 
on most investment income, including capital gains. So, it is quite possible that the combined tax 
increase beginning in 2013 will be 8.8%, bringing the total to 23.8%! That is a significant tax increase, 
reducing the net proceeds to shareholders. Do the math and you may agree that 2012 is the year to sell. It 
takes time to sell a business. As of May 1, 2012, only eight months remain in 2012 to complete a 
transaction. Usually, that is adequate time, but it does not leave much time to spare. 
 
 
 
 
 
Spring 2012 
3 | P a g e  
 
 
ACTIVITY AT GPA 
 
We at GPA remain relatively active, working toward several closings and having completed one closing 
so far in 2012. Two are scheduled for closing by the end of the second quarter. Over the years we have 
developed a strong professional relationship with a host of qualified buyers that have purchased 
companies that we have represented. In most cases we represent sellers.  We represent buyers too 
occasionally, but we never represent a buyer and a seller in the same tran saction. Currently, we have 
been approached by both strategic and investor groups in search for good companies engaged in 
providing services to all market sectors in most market areas. Specifically, there is opportunity for 
sellers that are located in the mid-Atlantic, south-east, south-central and mid-west market areas. 
 
 
A PERSONAL TRIBUTE 
 
Many of you may know Bill Garlough and the fine work that he has done over the years as a M&A 
intermediary, having exclusive focus in the building services industry. W hile I have no specific 
numbers, Bill has been involved with many successful transactions over the years. 
 
Bill and I are friends and have been for many years despite our competing in the M&A marketplace. I 
have learned from Bill’s wisdom and have always admired his gentle approach to the M&A world. 
 
Bill is soft spoken and recognized by many at BSCAI Conventions by his uniform of a light blue blazer 
that he claims brings him luck. You may not know that at one time, Bill wore the uniform of a US 
Marine and was among those heroes at the Battle of Okinawa , a decisive battle that led to the end of 
World War II. 
 
Bill recently retired, but still makes himself available for discussions about the M&A world. Thank you, 
Bill, for your friendship and your contributio n to the building services industry. Please join me in 
wishing Bill and his wife, Charlotte, a very happy and healthful retirement. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Please feel free to comment or questions anything that is included in this issue of Stay Tuned.  I 
appreciate receiving those comments or questions and will respond. If you have questions about your 
own interest in either buying a company or selling a company, please contact me directly. You can be 
assured of complete confidentiality. I’ll look forward to seeing ma ny of you at the BSCAI Executive 
Seminar in Scottsdale, AZ in May. Please contact me in advance if you would like to meet with me for a 
few minutes while there. 
 
 
 STAY TUNED! 
 
