Fall 2013 
1 | P a g e  
 
Stay Tuned 
The M&A Sector of the 
Building Services Industry: 
 
Fall 2013 
 
Opinion:  Gary A Penrod 
Gary Penrod and Associates, Inc. 
843.681.6588 x 11 
Gary@garypenrod.com 
 
 
STAY TUNED –  A Periodic Update Of The Building Services Industry’s M&A Sector 
 
WHY ACQUISTIONS SUCCEED; WHY THEY FAIL.  PLUS, M&A OUTLOOK FOR 2014. 
 
Comment: Thankfully, most acquisitions within the Building Services Industry succeed; however,  
a few do not. Let’s discuss why some acquisitions work and some do not. 
 
 
Seller Commitment – A must for a successful transaction. 
 
Is it the right time to sell?  Difficult to know when, but as time marches on, one may ask that question of 
oneself more frequently. To be s ure, there are many considerations, some of which are more difficult 
than others. It is a very personal decision, sometimes affecting the lives of others, including family and 
key employees for which there are strong feelings of loyalty and obligation.  It is sometimes difficult to 
untangle these feelings, however the decision to go forward does not have to be made until all of the 
effects of selling are known. It can be done piecemeal, that is, starting the process, delaying the final 
decision until all of the facts are considered. That is not to say that the process should entered into just to 
gain insight and a valuation for the company. It should be entered into in good faith with the expectation 
that the result will be the company’s acquisition unless th ere is some unforeseen issue that develops, or 
your expectation can’t be met. 
 
As far as it being the right time to sell within the context of there being qualified buyers and the timing 
relative to company valuation; there are qualified buyers and valuatio ns for companies in the industry 
have held the line. I do not expect that to change, so the question about when to sell is more a matter of 
when is the right time for the shareholder(s) to sell , not whether or not there will be qualified 
prospective buyers, or are current valuations high or low. 
 
 
Fall 2013 
2 | P a g e  
 
What is the plan for the future?  Without one, the ultimate success of the transaction will be less likely.  
Often, the entrepreneur knows only one life; that is, following a path  of building a company with all of 
its struggles, hard work, some disappointment, but usually resulting in the ultimate state of success. 
Time has passed and suddenly, it seems like selling the c ompany may be the right thing to  do. If all the 
signs point to a successful transaction, one still has to figure out what to do next: start a new venture (in 
a different industry, of course), fulfill one’s dreams of climbing Mt Everest , volunteering in some 
worthwhile activity. Whatever one does, it has to be realized that life will be different after t he sale of 
one’s company and that choosing and following a new path, while different, can still be rewarding  and 
fun, too. 
 
None know when life’s circumstances will be such that a company should be sold, so it is wise that any 
company always be in a state o f readiness if that should happen. A state of readiness would include: 
company records being current, management in place that can fill the gap , a list of add back items that 
will provide adjustments to profit for valuation purposes and finally, the design ation of a competent 
group or person that will manage the sale of the company. 
 
How much money is enough? It is different for each, but coming to grips with this question will be key 
for a successful transaction. Money, while a consideration for many entrep reneurs, is frequently not the 
sole or most important factor in becoming an entrepreneur. Control of one’s own destiny for many is, at 
least, as important as money. Along the way, however, money takes on a life of its own. If a company is 
successful, one c an live “the good life .” Money is  available and to some , seems to be infinite, even 
though it is finite. So, when considering the sale of one’s largest asset, it becomes obvious that money is 
no longer infinite, it is finite, just as it  has always been. Going forward, this perception adjustment will 
be necessary. For most, the proceeds from the sale will be more than ample to proceed with a reasonable 
lifestyle, or to finance a new venture. That lifestyle or venture has to be considered within the context of: 
time commitment, stress, risk and other opportunities that have appeal, but can be realized only if the 
company is sold. If a seller concludes that what is being offered does not meet expectation or needs, the 
choices are to continue wit h the company, making the necessary changes that will increase valuation 
within the short-term, or to simply abandon the thought of selling the company for the time being. 
 
Is the seller open to some compromise? Without it, the transaction has little chance  of success, or even 
getting off the ground.  Sellers and buyers, if attracted to one another, will have ideas about some of the 
issues that arise that are different. Dealing effectively with those differences is called negotiation. If one 
or the other side is intractable, the process will likely stall and die. It is always helpful in any negotiation 
to put oneself in the other person’s shoes, trying to look for what is important for that person. If that 
important issue is found and appreciated, perhaps ther e can be some compromise on that issue, allowing 
the opportunity for further compromise for an issue important to the other side. Much of the time, gaps 
can be bridged; sometimes they can’t be. Usually, intractability on one or each side can be sensed earl y 
on in the process. It happens that way some of the time ; however, in some cases, each side has gained 
insight and appreciation for the other and  they return to the table in months , or even years after the first 
attempt.  
 
 
 
 
Fall 2013 
3 | P a g e  
 
Understanding risk and residual risk is essential.  Acquisition can be risky business. It is far less risky to 
each party when the risk is discussed, appreciated and evaluated with reasonable counter-action included 
in the transaction documents. Risk should be faced for what it is; not ne cessarily what it could be. It 
should be neither overstated, nor understated. Sometimes bad things happen , but usually there can be 
agreement so that when the unexpected does happen, provision can be made so as to minimize the effect 
for each party. There are numerous examples of bad things happening, yet the acquisition continues on 
as a long -term successful project because each side negotiated in good -faith and provided for things 
going not quite as planned. Face the risk issues rationally; discuss them and provide for the eventuality if 
one surfaces. 
 
Being prepared for and wanting the buyer to succeed . A successful acquisition requires that both the 
buyer and the seller succeed and that each reaches their expected goals. To the extent possible , the 
agreement should be structured so that goals  are met and success is mutual. Each needs to work toward 
the other’s success. Without this, the acquisition will be less successful for each.  
 
 
The Buyer’s Commitment and Qualification. Without each, the effort will not work. 
 
The prospective buyer must have more than the desire to acquire; there must be the financial 
qualification to undertake the project. This needs to be conveyed to the seller at the onset of discussions. 
Without the willingness to substantiate qualification, the seller should discontinue the effort until that 
qualification is substantiated. The buyer too, should understand that their lack of qualification will cause 
the transaction to fail, so that qualification needs to be determined early on.  The desire and commitment 
to buy is not enough. Furthermore, qualification to get the transaction completed is not enough  either. 
There has to be financial qualification and commitment to grow the acquired company if there is to be 
any purpose in acquiring the company.  It just may be that if a prospective buyer answers these points 
honestly, growing through an accelerated marketing plan may be the better option. 
 
The buyer’s vision . Is the motivation for acquiring a company to ramp up revenue, to el iminate a 
competitor or to feed ego ; or is there a vision for the exponential growth of the combined companies, 
leading to greater profit and opportunity? This is an important consideration for any prospective buyer 
and it needs to be given very careful th ought.  Leaping into a pointless acquisition can ultimately lead to 
stunted growth and headache for a buyer. 
 
Learning from past acquisitions . People learn by doing. The same applies to those that acquire 
companies. A prospective buyer needs to look back, figuring out what worked and what did not work. 
While each acquisition is unique, there are some features that are similar for ea ch one. Build on what 
was done well and what could have been done better. Experience shows that buyer’s regret is frequently 
due to not having vision for the combined entity, a poorly executed transition for the combined 
companies and failure to exploit the strength of the combined companies. A buyer should be able to look 
back after one year, three years and five years, thinking that the acquisition, while not trouble free, was a 
wise move. 
 
 
 
Fall 2013 
4 | P a g e  
 
How significant will this acquisition be for the buyer ? If it a make or break project, then there is much 
reason to approach the acquisition with care and to redouble the effort to make sure th at all of the bases 
are covered. If there are remaining doubts after being as careful as practical, the better course may be to 
not proceed with the transaction. As painful as that would be, it is probably better that getting in too 
deep and causing failure for all concerned. 
 
Understanding the selling company’s strengths , weaknesses and the goals of the seller shareholder(s ). 
This is a must for the prospective buyer to be successful. If it is perceived that the seller’s goals will not 
be attained, steps nee d to be taken to realign those goals. For the transaction to be successful over the 
long haul, complete honesty is required by the buyer, discussing the vision for the combined entity. 
When the visions of the buyer and seller are aligned, then the transact ion should proceed. Absent that 
alignment, it should be suspended. 
 
What does a prospective seller’s or buyer’s negotiation style indicate?  
 
It may not be love at first sight , but soon after serious discussion begins there should be some general 
respect and appreciation for each other’s approach to the discussion. Aside from honesty and integrity, it 
is always helpful when there is mutual appreciation and respect for the other’s accomplishments. 
Bullying is not a tactic that will lead to a mutually good trans action. Past mistakes or failures should be 
discussed only as they apply to the transaction at hand. In the end, mutually good transactions that work 
for the long-term require this mutual respect and professionalism. 
 
The current state of M&A activity within the building services industry.  
 
 
Activity continues at a moderate rate, although, much of the activity appears to be spearheaded by equity 
groups looking to gain a foothold in the industry. Strategic groups too , are somewhat active. We believe 
that there are some closet sellers, still not sure whether or not this is a good time to test the water. We at 
GPA think that it is a good time, but only if it is the right time for the seller. Overall, we see both 
investor and strategic buyers that appear to be qualified and eager to consider an acquisition. 
Commercial banks seem to be loosening up a bit, making an acquisition that makes sense a possibility 
for a strategic buyer with a history of good performance and  with t he ability to provide  some cash 
contribution for the project. 
 
We at GPA remain quite busy with projects and continue to discuss possibilities with both prospective 
sellers and buyers. 
 
A word about valuation with regard to the buyer’s company valuation. G enerally, the valuation will not 
reflect an acquisition addition until the acquisition is fully integrated  and there is a history of 
performance for the combined entity. This may take years, not just months. So, flipping is not 
necessarily a good idea. 
 
We feel that the general state of the economy has a significant bearing on the activity within the M&A 
sector of the industry. There appears to be some e conomic improvement, but we are hard pressed to say 
that it is a trend yet. We are, however, cautiously optimistic about what lies ahead. 
Fall 2013 
5 | P a g e  
 
There is a new face at GPA . It is my pleasure to welcome Christi Rohmer as an associate with Gary 
Penrod and Associates. Please read about Christi in the attached note about her. I am very happy that 
she has joined us and an ticipate that her skill, experience and knowledge will benefit our clients for a 
long time to come. 
 
I have also attached some brief information about a few of the companies that we are currently 
representing. Please contact me directly if you want to discuss any of these offerings in detail , or if you 
want to discuss valuation for your company and its prospects for a successful sale . Contact me also 
about any comment or question about what I have written here. I will be happy to discuss any matter in 
depth. 
 
 
STAY TUNED! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
