Winter 2013 
1 | P a g e  
 
Stay Tuned 
The M&A Sector of the 
Building Services Industry: 
 
Winter 2013 
 
Opinion:  Gary A Penrod 
Gary Penrod and Associates, Inc. 
843.681.6588 x 11 
Gary@garypenrod.com 
 
 
STAY TUNED –  A Periodic Update Of The Building Services Industry’s M&A Sector 
 
In the last issue of Stay Tuned, I addressed the issue of uncertainty among business owners because of 
the possible changes in the tax code. At that point, it was anyone’s guess about what would happen. We 
no longer have to guess, although the exact impact for individuals and their company may still be 
unknown until it is studied further. However, it is clear that individuals and companies will be paying 
more to the government. In addition to that, there is the impact of The Affordable Healthcare Act 
(Obamacare) that must be analyzed. I have heard a variety of ways with which company owners are 
preparing to deal with this reality, however, there remains a feeling of uncertainty about the various 
scenarios that are being analyzed about how to best deal with it. One thing is certain: The Affordable 
Care Act will impact every business owner; it is just a question of how and how much! This will be 
playing out for the next few years. 
 
A Feeling of Pessimism Dominates. It is more common now than even in the darkest days of 2009 and 
2010. Then, it was confusion causing the uncertainty; now, as reality settles in, the cause of the 
pessimism seems to be the stark reality about what must to be done to stay ahead. For the small business 
owner, it truly is a cliff that, unless there is bold thinking, planning and execution, they are at risk of 
falling over. That is the pessimism that all of us feel on the dark days; however, in reality, there is still 
good news and there will be ways found to avoid disaster, thus making for sunny days too. The sunny 
days may not be quite as bright as in the past, but still sunny. 
 
Defeating The Pessimism. The best way, I guess, is to think about what has to be accomplished within 
one’s own company and to control those things that can be controlled. It’s not an easy task some of the 
time, but being a businessperson requires a special kind of person that is able to juggle the situations that 
one finds oneself in. The Affordable Healthcare Act will certainly take some thought and planning. It is 
more of a problem for smaller, non-union companies that for larger, unionized companies. Those caught 
in the middle are companies that are not unionized and have more than fifty employees. The fear, of 
course, is that if the cost is passed on to the customer, it will trigger a re-bid situation. Everyone has 
faced that before and dealt with it effectively. It will be that way this time too. 
Winter 2013 
2 | P a g e  
 
Is Selling One’s Company The Answer?  Maybe; if the time is right, but not necessarily if the time is 
not right and one is simply not able at this time to deal effectively with the problems that have besieged 
most businesspeople. It is better to not consider selling while under duress. Find a way to get out from 
under and build up again, getting to a point where the company is in a better position to be sold. It will 
take a little time, but the chances are good that it will be time well spent. 
Selling one’s company is a personal choice. It is not within the scope of an  advisor’s (Lawyers, CPAs, 
M&A Intermediaries) responsibility to tell one when to sell. Their responsibility is to help one see the 
pros and cons for each path, providing one with the best information available. Making the decision to 
proceed is difficult for many and often will not be made 100% when the process of selling begins. For 
many, clarity begins as the process continues through closing. Depending on the situation and those 
providing advice during the process, the reality of one’s new life comes into focus, so that there is 99% 
certainty as the ink is put to paper. Be prepared to never know for certain that the correct decision was 
made until viewed in retrospect! 
 
2012: The Year That Was. From my perspective, 2012 was not necessarily what I expected. It was 
clear to me that the looming capital gain tax rate increase, significant other tax increases and The 
Affordable Healthcare Act all would all provide the impetus for a banner year for transactions in the 
building services industry. Certainly, there were some transactions completed, but not the number that I 
anticipated. I am still not certain why, but it is apparently the case across the board among small and 
middle market companies among all industries, according to William Blair Company’s Merger Tracker 
for Q3, 2012. Maybe it is because entrepreneurs simply like the challenge of facing a difficult situation, 
meeting the challenge and then moving on to sell, or not sell. Or, it may just be that the sale of one’s 
company is simply a stepping stone for shareholders moving on to a new venture and that they are 
exercising caution now about moving on, feeling that staying put is the more prudent position for right 
now. We’ll see what happens in 2013! 
 
2013: The Year That Will Be. I am somewhat reluctant to make any prediction about M&A activity 
within the building services industry for 2013, however, I do believe that 2013 will be, at least, as good 
as 2012, if not a tad better. Why?  I think that now that everyone has some idea about what the future 
holds in spite of some lingering uncertainty, those that have managed their companies well for the past 
several years and are now at an optimum point in their personal life, will go on to begin the selling 
process if that has been a goal for them. While cognizant of the business climate, they are satisfied that 
their companies are ready and they, personally, are ready too. So, while I am not predicting a banner 
year, I do think that it will be a good year. One thing is certain: qualified buyers are ready and do have 
the cash. 
 
How Have The Economic Challenges of the Recent Past Affected Value?  While some will argue 
that there has been a negative impact on overall market valuations for companies within the building 
service industry, I do not necessarily agree. Yes; a company that has not performed as well as in the 
recent past and has been slow to grow will see some negative impact of their market value, however, 
those companies that have successfully met the challenges that have faced them, will see no decline in 
value in my judgment. I will agree that some buyers will make the effort to devalue a prospect company 
because of the economic downturn. It may work for them sometimes, but not always for a good 
company with astute shareholders and advisors. There will always be a qualified buyer that recognizes 
value. 
Winter 2013 
3 | P a g e  
 
We’ll have to see how 2013 unfolds. Challenges remain; however, a good company with a good 
management team can hold the line on value in my view. 
 
What Can Be Done To Hold The Line?  Nothing new here; it’s the same as in the past: Stay alert to 
changes, have an effective marketing plan and growth implementation plan and go about doing business 
while keeping the goal post in sight. Growth is a good thing so long as it is productive growth and not 
growth just for the sake of increasing the top line. Provide opportunity and challenge for management, 
allowing them to contribute and share in the company’s success. Finally, for the operator-shareholder: 
Be a visionary, trying to avoid being caught up in the weeds and always looking ahead. 
 
Here is to success for all companies that are engaged in the building services industry, whether or not 
selling one’s company, or buying a company is a goal for 2013!  Happy New Year. 
 
 
 
STAY TUNED! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PS.  I invite you to contact me directly about any question or comments that you may have about what is 
written here. Also, please feel free to contact me about any questions that you may have about the 
acquisition process, market valuation or about companies that may be for sale. If selling your company 
or,  buying a company is being considered, please contact me with the assurance of complete 
confidentiality. 
We are actively seeking companies that may be considering a sale that are located in the Western, 
Midwestern and Southeastern states in response to qualified buyers that are seeking to acquire good 
companies of all sizes.  gp. 
 
 
 
 
