Spring 2014 
1 | P a g e  
 
Stay Tuned 
The M&A Sector of the 
Building Services Industry: 
 
Spring 2014 
 
Opinion:  Gary A Penrod 
Gary Penrod and Associates, Inc. 
843.681.6588  
www.garypenrodandassociates.com 
gary@garypenrod.com 
 
 
STAY TUNED – Periodic Update For The Building Services Industry’s M&A Sector 
 
The state of the M&A sector of the building services industry is alive and well (almost). There remain 
some uncertainties as a result of the world economic downturn in 2008, but living with that uncertainty 
has now become the new normal, so some sellers that held off selling their businesses have now decided 
that it may be the time to proceed with that effort. As in the case of any transaction that has significant 
importance to the parties involved, selling or buying a business that is engaged in the building services 
industry can encounter some bumps along the way. This issue of STAY TUNED will address some of 
those bumps and suggestions about how to avoid, or to deal effectively with them. Additionally, some 
basics about the closing process will be discussed. 
 
THE M&A PROCESS; SOME PITFALLS TO EXPECT 
 
In The Beginning there was a seller and a buyer. Each has interest in what the other has to offer, so the 
process that can end with a successful transaction begins with great expectations and a mutual 
confidentiality agreement in place. Here we go. 
 
The usual sequence of events that will lead to a closing is: 
 
1. The Initial Discussion between the parties is usually an overview and the opportunity to take 
measure of the other side. Frequently, this initial meeting can reveal whether or not one’s initial prior 
perception was correct, or not. It will certainly reveal things about the other that were not known and 
may change one’s perception of the other, either in a positive or negative way. There can also begin to 
develop a view of the other in a personal sense. Will one enjoy working with the other person? Is there 
mutual trust? A second and third meeting may follow, during which more detail is discussed. Copious 
notes taken by each party is a good idea to be referred to throughout the process.  At this point, a 
transaction is still in the distant (probably months) future, if there is to be one at all. After the initial 
Spring 2014 
2 | P a g e  
 
meetings have taken place and both parties are still interested in taking the next step, it will be time to 
take that next step. 
 
2. The Term Sheet is an informal, non-binding document that, in written form, presents the highlights 
of what has been discussed and agreed. Usually, the Term Sheet development is a joint effort and may 
go through several revisions. In some cases, it may be skipped, going directly to a Letter of Intent (LOI).  
By this time, advisors on each side are advising their clients, so they too have a hand in the Term Sheet 
development. It is wise to remember that the Term Sheet is important in that, when developed, it will 
reveal more about the other side. In final draft form, there should be a meeting to make sure that there is 
clarity. If conflicts arise, it is usually at this stage. When completed and agreed upon, it is time to go to 
the next step.  (Remember; the process is still at the stage where only those that need to know, should 
have any knowledge that discussions are taking place.) 
 
3. The Letter of Intent (LOI), like the Term sheet, is non-binding, although there may be certain parts 
that are binding (confidentiality is one example). It is usually written by the Buyer’s attorney. It will be 
sent to the Seller’s attorney for review and comment. Working together, the attorneys will provide a 
final draft to their clients for approval. The LOI will often describe a price, a transaction structure and 
dates for the due diligence process and closing. There may be additional confidentiality requirements for 
each party, including a non-solicitation provision for the Buyer who will now have access to the Seller’s 
individual account information during the due diligence process. Agreement on the terms of the LOI is a 
significant step, and one that, in most cases, is a sure sign that the transaction will proceed to a closing. 
It is at this stage, if not before, that advisors, both internal and external, will necessarily be brought into 
the process, although if the Seller or the Buyer is represented by an M&A intermediary, they will likely 
have been involved from the beginning of the process. It may be wise to discuss the importance of 
confidentiality to all at this point. In some cases a confidentiality agreement may be a wise precaution 
for all that are involved in the process. The Buyer must, at this point, provide information about their 
ability to finance the transaction, including their cash contribution, the lender’s cash contribution and a 
letter of commitment from the lender stating that the financing will be provided and, under what 
conditions. Now; it is time for due diligence. 
 
4. The Due Diligence Process begins after there is total agreement as expressed in the LOI. The process 
will be the buyer’s effort to confirm what has been purported by the Seller with regard to all financial 
records, performance, operations, management infrastructure and more. In short; it is the time when the 
Buyer has the opportunity to see and be made aware about all aspects of the Seller’s company. If the 
Seller and advisors have done their job well, there will be few, if any, surprises. Sometimes, the Buyer’s 
internal staff performs the due diligence; other times, the Buyer may elect to outsource some of the task, 
usually to an accounting firm. If not provided before, now is the time for the Buyer to produce final 
arrangements for financing the project including a formal commitment from the lender.  A concurrent 
effort will be underway for the Buyer’s attorney to develop all of the closing document drafts. Due 
diligence is not only for the Buyer to make sure that what has be purported about the Seller’s company 
is verified, but it also a time for the Seller to verify that the Buyer will have the financing to complete 
the transaction in the form of a lender commitment letter and any other sources of funds that will be 
required to complete the transaction. 
 
5. The Purchase Agreement and Other Closing Documents, usually after some minor revisions, are 
ready to be signed by each party. When signed, there is one more important step: funding.  
Spring 2014 
3 | P a g e  
 
 
 
6. The Closing is complete when the funds have been distributed according to the Purchase Agreement. 
Let the fun begin. 
 
Looking at these six steps that will lead to the transaction’s closing appears to be easy enough; right? 
No; it is never easy. However; it can be less difficult when the Buyer and the Seller anticipate possible 
areas of conflict, giving it thought and developing their own plan for resolution as needed. Conflicts, 
differences of opinion are bound to occur. Usually, when dealing in good faith and appreciating the 
other’s perspective, the problems can be worked out to each party’s satisfaction. The differences can 
become evident at any time, but it is much better for the major differences to be worked out early in the 
process, even during the initial meetings. Some of the more common areas of disagreement include: 
 
1. Valuation: Not Exact Science. One person’s view of value may be different than another and each 
can be correct. Value is perceived, based on one’s own experience, need, and the perceived effect on the 
individual or entity. There are, of course, comparable transactions that have taken place, or rules of 
thumb for any given industry that can be cited to support one’s valuation, that is, if you can believe what 
you hear. They may or may not be a reliable indicator of value for another entity. The trick it to have 
two valuation scenarios that are close and to negotiate from there. Valuation methodology is important 
too. Is value determined by averaging the past three or four years, or is a better valuation based on a 
Trailing Twelve Month (TTM) calculation? There can be good arguments for these and other methods 
too. Past financial performance is not the only consideration when assigning value to an entity.  Thought 
has to be given to the likelihood of the past performance continuing, so management depth and their 
continuing under new ownership has to be weighed too. Other things to consider include: market sectors 
in which the company operates, customer retention rate, opportunity for growth within the market 
sectors and market areas served. 
 
2. The Price Components can be another area of difference between a Buyer and a Seller. The Buyer 
may want to use less cash than the Seller wants to receive. Again, there are comparable transactions and 
rules of thumb to gauge what is usual. Sometimes the percentage of the purchase price that is guaranteed 
(cash, promissory note) can influence the purchase price, either up or down. Certainly, a cash transaction 
will have a lower price that one with less cash or a guaranteed promissory note. 
 
3. Working Capital is sometimes misunderstood and can be a source of problem. A Seller can look at 
accounts receivables as being part of their proceeds and a Buyer will consider that the purchase will be 
of a going concern, including the working capital. Each scenario can work, but there will be an effect on 
price. It usually works out that the Buyer keeps working capital as calculated and agreed by both groups; 
however, the Seller keeps all cash and retains all debt too. As usual; each transaction is unique, so this is 
not written in stone. 
 
4. Notice of the Impending Sale to Customers can be a source of disagreement. Frequently, as part of 
the operational due diligence, a Buyer will want to be introduced to a selection of the company’s 
customers, making the Seller somewhat uncomfortable because the closing has not yet occurred. There 
are ways around this that will satisfy both the Buyer and the Seller, one of which may be for the seller to 
secure a letter of good standing from the customer. 
 
Spring 2014 
4 | P a g e  
 
 
 
5. Key Employee Interviews by the Buyer group before closing is another possible source of conflict. 
The Buyer wants to make sure that key managers are onboard, plus it provides a one-on-one time to 
assess the depth of management. Sellers may be reluctant to reveal their intention to sell, perhaps 
because there is still a chance that the transaction will not happen. Sometimes the interviews are 
conducted with both the Buyer and the Seller present. Most of the time, whatever the format and 
whomever is present, interviews will need to take place. 
 
6. Feeling, or Evidence of Dealing in Bad Faith can develop in either group at any time during the 
process; and when it does, no matter at what stage the process is, ending the process should be 
considered. It doesn’t happen too often, but when it becomes evident, it is often too risky to proceed.  
Integrity and good faith deliberation should always be expected. There will always be other 
opportunities. 
 
7. Too Much Elapsed Time can have a negative impact on the possibility of completing a successful 
transaction. If the process is slowed due to principal or advisor schedules or becoming bogged down 
with trivial (one can argue that there are no trivial matters when buying or selling a company) matters, 
it is quite possible that one or the other will become less enthusiastic about going forward. Priorities can 
change. One side may get the impression that the other is stalling for some reason. The effort needs to be 
thorough and deliberate, but taking too much time can cause unnecessary delays, confidentiality leaks 
and in some cases, lead to the disintegration of the process. Momentum lost; the deal languishes and 
may not close. 
 
8. Look Out For The EGO Effect. Everyone has ego, but in the matters of mergers and / or 
acquisitions, it’s better to check one’s ego at the door. Winning or conceding a point can sometimes 
make or break a deal. Usually compromise on both sides of the table is necessary for the completion of a 
successful deal. If one’s ego gets in the way, even when common sense dictates compromise, it can 
cause a deal to crash.  Many speak of wanting a win-win deal, but hyper-egoism makes a win-win deal 
far less likely. 
 
9. Greed Can Become Evident at any time. Sometimes it can be related to egoism, but it usually is the 
case when one side or the other acts or makes demands that are unreasonable, without concern about 
whether or not it is fair or reasonable to the other. A sign of greed is when one side makes such a 
demand near the end of the process, calculating that the other side has come too far to not go forward 
with the transaction and that the demand will be met. The other side needs to breathe deeply and look at 
the big picture, to agree, or simply say; no, letting the chips fall where they will. 
 
10. The Standoff refers to a situation in which one side or the other refuses to take the next step unless 
the other takes a step first. Usually, this is an indication that there is a problem between the parties. It 
may be mistrust, or it could just be an indication that each party is looking for a way to end or alter the 
transaction features that have already be agreed upon. It may also be the result of one party feeling that 
their side has done most of the compromising and that the other side needs to compromise more. The 
standoff is not a good sign and, unless someone can break the log jam, the project will likely falter and 
die.  
 
Spring 2014 
5 | P a g e  
 
11. Going Dark. In other words, one side or the other side, ceases to communicate. This is not a good 
sign. Even if traveling, or there has been some unexpected crises that prevents active communication, 
there is always a way to send a short email to indicate when the process will resume. Going dark often 
means that one or the other side is beginning to back out for some reason, or, at least, is reevaluating 
whether or not to proceed. That can happen, but going dark is not the way to express it. One can always 
be direct and truthful. 
 
12. Finally, The Closing Crazies happen. This refers to a plethora of small, often inconsequential 
issues that seem to appear out of thin air. Perhaps it is because of pent up fear or reluctance about the 
impending sale by each party. It is sometimes referred to as, Buyer’s remorse, or Seller’s remorse. It 
usually passes, but has been known to cause a delay in closing. The usual cure for this is to take a little 
time out, thinking through all options. 
 
Looking at these twelve pitfalls that can occur does not necessarily mean that they will occur. However, 
if you are a prospective buyer or seller, these and others are things for which one should be prepared.  
 
Most of the time, the process will continue to closing after the Term Sheet milestone has been reached. 
Not all, if any, of the pitfalls shown here will happen, but it is better to be on the lookout in case they do 
occur. The process, even if terminated at some point, can often be resumed. If the acquisition has merit, 
but ended for some reason, one or both parties may, upon second thought, want to resume. It has 
happened more than once. 
 
Merger and acquisition activity is a business fact of life in all industries, including the building services 
industry.  For a buyer, it can be a good way to grow; for a seller, it can be the means for a company’s 
legacy to continue as well as a means for shareholders to realize the fruits of their daring, sacrifice and 
work over many years.  
 
I invite your comments, questions and criticism for this issue of Stay Tuned. What is written herein is 
based on my personal experience in the M&A sector of the building services industry over many years 
and before that, as a building service contractor that experienced the sale of his own business. Your 
comments, questions and criticism will be appreciated. Thank you. Stay Tuned. 
 
Regards, Gary 
Gary Penrod, CBSE 
Managing Associate, Gary Penrod and Associates, Inc. 
 
 STAY TUNED! 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PS   See the attached list of a few of the companies that GPA is currently representing. Please contact us 
for further information about these offerings or, if you have interest in exploring the sale of your 
company. 
