1 | Page  
 
March 29, 2009 
September 15, 2010 
The M&A Sector of the 
Building Services Industry: 
Current Status 
OPINION –  Gary A. Penrod 
  Gary Penrod and Associates, Inc. 
  843 681 6588 x11 
  Penrod3111@aol.com 
  www.garypenrodandassociates.com  
  
In the last status report, I referred to the ec onomic status as it applies to small business in 
general and the building services industry in particular as being dismal, but with a glimmer of light 
beginning to emerge.  That glimmer persist and while dismal may not accurately described the current 
economic status, it is still far from robust.   
As during the first and second quarters of 2010, uncertainty still prevails.  However, while 
uncertainty may still prevail, I sense that the industry is becoming used to it, so it just may be that what is 
happening is that the industry is moving ahead in spite of the economic uncertainty.  It just may be that, 
at least for the immediate future, the current economic atmosphere is the new normal.  It could be worse!  
Recovery to where we were prior to September 2008 may take a long time, or maybe that status is 
a thing of the past, never to be achieved again in ou r lifetime.  However, I remain optimistic that those 
engaged in the building services industry will work hard to  make the new normal work well.  It is already 
happening.  Profits, while not necessarily robust, are not  far off from that of pre 2008.  In fact, some 
companies, depending on the market sector in which they are engaged, are prospering.  The industry has 
always been innovative, going back to the birth of th e modern building services industry, just after World 
War II.  That innovative spirit is alive and well in my view, continuing to influence the evolution of the 
industry. 
2 | Page  
 
 
 
How has all of this influenced the merger and acqu isition activity within the industry?  Activity 
has increased from the low rate of 2009 that was influenced by fear and uncertainty.  Even in 2009, 
however, valuation for good companies held the line.  Beginning in the first quarter of 2010, activity has 
increased.  Buyers and sellers, albeit perhaps mo re cautious, are moving forward in the new normal  
atmosphere.   
According to William Blair and Company in their monthly commentary* 
• "Private-equity activity continues to accelerate. 
• Recent activity shows solid increase. 
• Recent middle-market activity continues to rebound. 
• They believe that the overall environment remains favorable for transaction 
activity to continue to show positive co mparisons, ending 20 10 with significant 
gains over the results of 2009." 
What about valuation?  I have observed valuation trends for companies engaged in the building 
services industry since 1984 and find that there has been  very little difference in valuation during those 
26 years.  True, there have been some differences in pr ice component ratios (cash, promissory note, earn 
out) during certain periods. However, even those ra tios have not varied significantly since 1984, and 
likely before 1984 too.  Therefore, in general, I conclude that even during the current economic 
atmosphere, good companies will continue to bring a price that is fair for both buyer and seller and that 
the original investment made to start a company will prove to have been a very good investment.  
As noted in the last issue, financing an acquis ition can still be a challenge if the buyer relies on a 
commercial bank for financing.  Equity financing through private sources and investment groups in 
taking up some of the shortfall in bank financing.  Investor groups especially,  have shown a keen interest 
in the industry, probably because of the relative stability of the industry.   
 
* Merger Tracker: August 2010 Issue from William Blair and Company 
 
Those groups, however, usually are looking for (1) adjusted EBITDA minimum of $1.5 million 
and (2) senior management that will stay on for 3(+) yea rs.  They gain comfort if the shareholder(s) are 
willing to agree to an earn out or to retain stock of 20% to 25% of the purchase price.  
 GPA is currently representing nine seller projects and is engaged in an e ffort with two qualified 
buyers seeking acquisitions that meet their preferred profile.   
 
Following are GPA's seller client market areas: 
  West Coast  2 
  Mid West  2 (one landscaping) 
  Northeast  1 
  Southeast  2 
  Canada   1 
  Caribbean  1 
 As I noted in the last issue, qualified buyers will valuate a company based on how it meets their 
unique expectations and how the fit is for them.  There is no right or wrong in determining value.  It is 
simply a matter of how important a particular acquisition is to the prospective buyer.   
 We at GPA remain cautiously optimistic about the rate of acquisitions activity during the 
remainder of 2010 and all of 2011, due primarily to  prospective buyers and sellers coming out of their 
protective shells.  We at GPA remain eager and abl e to assist both qualified prospective buyers and 
sincere sellers.  
 I invite your questions and comments about an ything that has been written here, or about any 
questions that you may have about the acquisition process. 
We are here to assist.  STAY TUNED! 
3 | Page  
 
